AI #2359: Add Actor (`Consumer ID` and `Principal ID`) columns to `Cost and Usage` dataset (#2360)
FinOps-Open-Cost-and-Usage-Spec/FOCUS_Spec: specification/conditions/includesprincipals.md

> # Includes Principals

Reviewer: ### Future consideration: generic Identity condition instead of Principal-specific

Not blocking for this PR, but flagging now while `IncludesPrincipals` is being introduced.

`Principal` is likely not the only identity concept FOCUS will need — e.g., a future `IdentityDetails` (with `Principal` as one identity types) column could follow the same pattern. If we tie the condition specifically to `Principal` now, we may end up needing a near-duplicate condition later instead of one shared condition.

Worth considering a more generic condition, e.g., `IncludesIdentityAttribution`

Reviewer 2: Done, in 462c57e2. The condition is now `IncludesIdentityAttribution`, carrying your wording from the other thread. Maintainers pointed the same way on Monday, and Identity Details already gates on this condition, so the rename landed here rather than in #2553, which picks it up on its next rebase.

> The Includes Principals condition represents a verifiable state indicating whether the [*operating model*](#glossary:operating-model) includes [*principals*](#glossary:principal).

Reviewer 3: Can we be more precise? What does "includes principals" mean? You could argue seat-based licenses are for individuals and VMs are used by individuals or even software. All of these are principals. I'm fine with this as a condition, but this feels very easily interpreted in different ways as is.

Reviewer 3: 🤖 [AI][Claude] 💡 **For discussion** (in reply to "what does 'includes principals' mean?" above)

Agree the current wording is too easily read multiple ways — and your seat-license/VM examples are exactly why: under a broad reading *everything* has a principal, so the condition is near-always-true and `PrincipalId` becomes mandatory-by-the-back-door, which isn't the intent.

A more precise trigger is **multiplicity, not existence**: `PrincipalId` earns its place when **more than one principal could initiate a given Cost and Usage row** — e.g., PaaS/API/GenAI where distinct callers share one account/sub-account. Where the only "initiator" is the account owner (a flat seat license, a single-tenant VM), the principal is redundant with `BillingAccountId`/`SubAccountId` and the condition should read false.

That test cleanly resolves your examples: a seat license billed to one account → no distinct principal → `IncludesPrincipals` = false; an API gateway where many service accounts call under one subscription → multiple possible principals per row → true. Suggesting the condition text be wordsmithed toward that "multiple possible principals could initiate a row" framing rather than bare "includes principals."

Reviewer 2: The condition file uses the same template as `IncludesRegions` and `IncludesProvisionedResources`, where precision lives in the linked glossary term rather than in the condition text. I tightened `Principal` to the identity and access management sense: the entity a service provider grants access to, distinct from the credential presented with a request. A flat seat license with no per-charge principal reads false under that. A service granting access to distinct users, roles, or service accounts reads true.

Reviewer 2: The condition now keys on the charge rather than on principals existing:

> IncludesPrincipals MUST evaluate to true when the *operating model* includes *charges* associated with a *principal*.

Anchoring Principal on the IAM principal had made the old wording nearly always true, since almost every provider defines entities that are granted access. Your VM case reads false under the new text, because the charge is associated with the VM and not with whoever used it. A per-seat charge that names the seat holder reads true, and I think that is the right answer: the seat holder is the principal, and PrincipalId should carry them.

This was not part of Monday's scope, so it is worth a TF-2 look before it settles.

Reviewer 2: The appendix examples are now on the branch, and scenarios 4 and 5 make the seat-license case concrete.

Both previously showed `PrincipalId` as `null`, on the reasoning that a pre-provisioned subscription has no originating requestor. That was the initiator framing, and it does not survive the identity and access management definition. SprintCanvas assigning a seat to a named user is granting that user access, so the seat holder is the principal and `PrincipalId` carries them. That follows the line I drew above: a flat seat license with no per-charge principal reads false, a per-seat charge that names the seat holder reads true.

Your VM case still reads false, since the charge is associated with the VM rather than with whoever used it.

This is in the PR description as an open question and on the TF-2 agenda for Wednesday, since it settles both the examples and the `IncludesPrincipals` trigger for seat-based models.

Reviewer 2: The condition has changed twice since we last talked here. Irena reworded it off charges and onto attribution, and it is now `IncludesIdentityAttribution`:

> IncludesIdentityAttribution MUST evaluate to true when the *operating model* includes attributing usage or purchase of *resources* or *services* to *principals*.

Your two cases separate under that. A VM reads false, since the charge is attributed to the VM rather than to whoever used it. A seat license that names the seat holder reads true. The gate is attributability, not whether the provider has an identity model, which is what made the earlier wording close to always true.

## Requirements

IncludesPrincipals MUST adhere to the following requirements:

* IncludesPrincipals MUST evaluate to true when the *operating model* includes *charges* associated with a *principal*.
* IncludesPrincipals MUST evaluate to false when the *operating model* does not include *charges* associated with a *principal*.

## Condition ID

IncludesPrincipals

## Display Name

Includes Principals

## Description

> A verifiable state indicating whether the *operating model* includes *charges* associated with a *principal*.

Reviewer: Every other condition in the spec is phrased as "operating model includes {construct}," without referencing charges, e.g.:

> "IncludesTags MUST evaluate to true when the *operating model* includes *tags*."
> "IncludesSubAccounts MUST evaluate to true when the *operating model* includes a sub account construct."

### Charge – Operating Model – Dataset relationship

Per the glossary, **Charge** = "a row in a FOCUS-compatible cost and usage dataset," while **Operating Model** = "the collective set of capabilities, business concepts, and data constructs *underlying* a FOCUS-compliant dataset."

A **charge** is a dataset row — **downstream output**, not an operating model construct. 

I'd also avoid phrasing this as just "operating model includes principals" — most operating models have *some* IAM concept, so that would make the condition close to always true and not a meaningful gate. What's actually conditional is whether usage or purchase activity is *attributable* to a principal — not all providers expose that (see Scenario 7 in the new appendix, where `PrincipalId` is null for billing-system-level charges like taxes and promotional credits).

### Suggested fix

```suggestion
# Includes Principals

The Includes Principals condition represents a verifiable state indicating whether the [*operating model*](#glossary:operating-model) includes attributing usage or purchase of [*resources*](#glossary:resource) or [*services*](#glossary:service) to [*principals*](#glossary:principal).

## Requirements

IncludesPrincipals MUST adhere to the following requirements:

* IncludesPrincipals MUST evaluate to true when the *operating model* includes attributing usage or purchase of *resources* or *services* to *principals*.
* IncludesPrincipals MUST evaluate to false when the *operating model* does not include attributing usage or purchase of *resources* or *services* to *principals*.

## Condition ID

IncludesPrincipals

## Display Name

Includes Principals

## Description

A verifiable state indicating whether the *operating model* includes attributing usage or purchase of *resources* or *services* to *principals*.
```
